add blog post about writing CLI tools with typescript (#5)
weeklyjs/weeklyjs.github.io: docs/_posts/2022-05-06-writing-cli-tools-with-typescript.md

> # Writing CLI tools with TypeScript

Reviewer: Your post is lacking meta information, so your post will be ignored.
Also please add the exact time you wish for it to be "published". It won't get rendered before even though it's merged. 

```suggestion
---
layout: post
title:  Writing CLI tools with TypeScript
date:   2022-05-06 08:00:13 +0100
categories: typescript, cli
author: Friedrich Kurz
---
```

Reviewer: I added some docs on how to run jekyll locally using docker only:
https://github.com/weeklyjs/weeklyjs.github.io#running-locally

Author: I added an excerpt attribute to the YAML frontmatter btw, so I can keep my headings in the main blog post.

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: You shouldn't start with a sub head line but instead with a short introduction which will also be used as excerpt.

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2569015/166449709-be43db0c-da72-4485-a9f4-35aecdba924f.png)

- [clap](https://docs.rs/clap/latest/clap/) (Rust)
- [Click](https://docs.python-guide.org/scenarios/cli/) (Python)
- [Picocli](https://picocli.info/picocli-2.0-groovy-scripts-on-steroids.html) (Groovy)
- [Commander.js](https://github.com/tj/commander.js) (JavaScript)

So, why would we prefer writing a CLI in TypeScript given all these other choices?

Well, TypeScript is an overall good choice for a couple of reasons: 

1. **compatibility** with JavaScript (TypeScript is a superset of—and by that token compatible with—JavaScript),
2. **popularity** (TypeScript was ranked 7th in the [2021 Stack Overflow Developer Survey](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2021#section-most-popular-technologies-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages) with JavaScript being 1st),
3. **tooling choice** (the Node.js ecosystem provides [quite a lot of CLI libraries](https://openbase.com/categories/js/best-javascript-cli-libraries)),
4. **developer friendliness** (TypeScript is a scripted language but also has an advanced type system and static type checking which helps writing high-quality code),

> 5. **performance** (since TypeScript code is, in the end, typically run by Node.js, it is in general sufficiently performant thanks to the [v8](https://v8.dev/) engine).

Reviewer: Suggestion: Increase link text from `v8` to `v8 engine` for fat finger proof-ness.

```suggestion
5. **performance** (since TypeScript code is, in the end, typically run by Node.js, it is in general sufficiently performant thanks to the [v8 engine](https://v8.dev/)).
```

> Nonetheless, a typically non-trivial part of any TypeScript project is the set up. Writing a CLI with e.g. Python and the [Click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/8.1.x/) library requires little more than writing a file with the [main function](https://docs.python.org/3/library/__main__.html#packaging-considerations). The higher setup complexity of TypeScript is of course due to the nature of TypeScript being a superset of JavaScript. To run TypeScript code, you typically transpile it to JavaScript and then execute the JavaScript code with Node.js. (Yes, even [ts-node](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node) does that.) So, before running a program written in TypeScript, we need to transpile it to JavaScript first. This requires tooling and therefore setup.

Reviewer: * `set up` -> `setup`
* `ouf course` -> `` (unnecessary fill word)

```suggestion
Nonetheless, a typically non-trivial part of any TypeScript project is the setup. Writing a CLI with e.g. Python and the [Click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/8.1.x/) library requires little more than writing a file with the [main function](https://docs.python.org/3/library/__main__.html#packaging-considerations). The higher setup complexity of TypeScript is due to the nature of TypeScript being a superset of JavaScript. To run TypeScript code, you typically transpile it to JavaScript and then execute the JavaScript code with Node.js. (Yes, even [ts-node](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node) does that.) So, before running a program written in TypeScript, we need to transpile it to JavaScript first. This requires tooling and therefore setup.
```

Preferably, we also want to have a single, packaged binary as the result of building our project, rather than a script file, to reduce installation overhead on part of the user. 

> To assure high code quality we also typically want to include code formatting, linting, and tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To assure high code quality we also typically want to include code formatting, linting and tests.
```

Author: I belive the comma is correct (https://www.grammarly.com/blog/what-is-the-oxford-comma-and-why-do-people-care-so-much-about-it/).

> Preferably, we also want to have a single, packaged binary as the result of building our project rather than a script file to reduce installation overhead on part of the user. 
> 
> To assure high code quality we also typically want to include code formatting, linting, and tests.
> 

Reviewer: Duplicate paragraphs.

```suggestion
```

## Basic development flow

> To hit the ground running, I created a starter project which already contains all required boilerplate and dependencies for running, formatting, linting, testing the code and packaging it to a binary. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To hit the ground running, I created a starter project which already contains all required boilerplate and dependencies for running, formatting, linting, testing and packaging the code to a binary. 
```

> ℹ️ The starter project can be found on my [GitHub](https://github.com/fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter) and via [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter/). 

```bash

> git clone git@github.com:fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter.git my-cli
> cd my-cli 
> npm i

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ git clone git@github.com:fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter.git my-cli
$ cd my-cli 
$ npm i
```

Author: This is meant to be cop & pastable and I don't show the output. So, omitting the $ on each line is intentional.

```

Our starter project uses 

- the [*commander*](https://www.npmjs.com/package/commander) package for argument parsing and executing commands, 
- code linting and formatting with [eslint](https://eslint.org/) and [prettier](https://prettier.io/), 

> - [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) as test runner and assertion library, and 

Reviewer: Not sure why you always have an `,` before `and`. It's also common to not write `and` at all but just a list, but both feels odd to me, doesn't it?

Author: It's called an _Oxford comma_ (https://www.grammarly.com/blog/what-is-the-oxford-comma-and-why-do-people-care-so-much-about-it/). 

Writing a list this way was standard at my university. May be awkward for some, I agree. What's your suggestion?

Reviewer: Well, than keep your style of writing :)

Author: > Well, **then** keep your style of writing :)

FTFY ;)

- [pkg](https://github.com/vercel/pkg) to build a stand-alone binary.

To illustrate the development flow, we now add an example subcommand and test it. 

> For example, we could add a command *yell* which is exactly like the *say* command (that already exists in the project) but a bit less subtle.

Reviewer: Skip `for example`. You already mentioned that in the previous sentence.

```suggestion
We could add a command *yell* which is exactly like the *say* command (that already exists in the project) but a bit less subtle.
```

> To do this, we add a file *src/yell.ts* and then add the following code.

Reviewer: I'd propose to use `code` instead of `italic` for paths.

```suggestion
To do this, we add a file `src/yell.ts` and then add the following code.
```

Author: I usually don't do that because backticks are imo reserved for code. Do we have a common style guide which suggests using backticks for paths? In that case, I will make the change.

Reviewer: I'm not aware of a style guide. Just used to use back-ticks for anything code _related_, such as paths and sometimes urls as well. The docs for nestjs do this for example: https://docs.nestjs.com/first-steps

```typescript
// src/yell.ts
import { Command } from "commander";

> export default (): Command =>
>  new Command()

Reviewer: Explicit typing followed by a constructor seems redundant though, since it can simply be inferred. It's like explicitly typing primitives (such as `const num: number = 5;`) which often considered as unnecessary and recommended to prevent (see [no-inferrable-types](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-inferrable-types/)).

```suggestion
export default () =>
 new Command()
```

Author: I agree that it's redundant but it is more clear imo. Also, ESLint didn't complain, so I think we're fine here.

  .name("yell")
  .description("Say the word passed as the first argument but louder")
  .argument("<word>")
  .action((word: string) => console.log(word.toLocaleUpperCase()));
```

> 

Reviewer: Markdown rendering doesn't care about the number of empty lines. They count as one and simply create a new paragraph. I suppose this is just for structuring the source markdown file?

Author: Unintentional.

We also have to register our yell command with the main CLI command in src/cmd.ts, i.e. add an import statement for our subcommand and register it using *Commander.addCommand* 

```typescript
// src/cmd.ts
// … 
import buildYellCmd from "./yell";
// …
export default (): Command => {

>  const command = new Command()

Reviewer: Do you indent code with 1 space by default? Seems odd to me. Please try to be consistent with other posts here – or make it 2 at least.

Author: No, I don't seems like that this happened during copy & pasting from the repo.

> export default (): Command => {
>  const command = new Command()
>   .option("-g, --greet", `Say ${HELLO}`, false)
>   .addCommand(buildSayCmd())
>   .addCommand(buildYellCmd())
>   .addHelpCommand()
>   .showHelpAfterError();
> ```

Reviewer: Either there's something missing (return statement, closing brace) or you wanted to write a lambda expression.

```suggestion
export default (): Command =>
 new Command()
  .option("-g, --greet", `Say ${HELLO}`, false)
  .addCommand(buildSayCmd())
  .addCommand(buildYellCmd())
  .addHelpCommand()
  .showHelpAfterError();
```
```

> ```
> ```

Reviewer: Empty code block, which will get rendered as such.

```suggestion
```

> Having done that, we can run a quick test on our command using the dev script in package.json. The dev script simply executes our TypeScript code with [ts-node](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having done that, we can run a quick test on our command using the `dev` script defined in package.json. The `dev` script simply executes our TypeScript code with [ts-node](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node).
```

Author: As before, I would use italics here since its just a name and not a code snippet.

Reviewer: Technically it's on one hand a reference to a piece of code (in `package.json`) and on the other hand something you type in the terminal as part of the command (`npm run dev`). This makes it more clear what you're referring to when mentioning "dev" imho.

```bash
$ npm run dev -- yell 'hey!'

> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 dev /private/tmp/my-cli
> ts-node src/main.ts "yell" "hey!"

HEY!
```

> We can also add a quick test by adding *src/yell.test.ts* with the following content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also add a test by adding *src/yell.test.ts* with the following content
```

```typescript
import buildCmd from "./cmd";

beforeEach(() => {

>  jest.spyOn(process, "exit").mockImplementation();
>  jest.spyOn(console, "log").mockImplementation();

Reviewer: `jest.spyOn()` already creates a mock function. There should be no need for an empty `.mockImplementation()` if you don't need to add a specific mock behavior.

```suggestion
 jest.spyOn(process, "exit");
 jest.spyOn(console, "log");
```

Author: I got his from SO. You're right though, the test also runs without `.mockImplementation` .

});

describe("Yell subcommand", () => {
 it("Should say 'HEY!' when passed 'hey!'", () => {
  const cmd = buildCmd();
  cmd.parse(["node", "cmd", "yell", "hey!"]);

>   expect(console.log).toHaveBeenCalledWith("HEY!");

Reviewer: There's a spy missing for `console.log` though, isn't it.

 });
});
```

Since our Jest configuration expects JavaScript test files, we first have to transpile our code with the build script using the TypeScript compiler *tsc*. The transpiled JavaScript source code is put into the dist/ folder.

```bash

> npm run build

Reviewer: Other shell commands are prefixed with a `$`.

```suggestion
$ npm run build
```

> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 build /private/tmp/my-cli
> tsc --build
```

We can now run our test suite with Jest using the test script. New test files will automatically get recognized by Jest if they have—as in our case—the suffix *.test.js*

```bash
$ npm run test
> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 test /private/tmp/my-cli
> jest

...

Test Suites: 3 passed, 3 total
Tests:       8 passed, 8 total
Snapshots:   0 total
Time:        0.41 s, estimated 1 s
Ran all test suites.
```

> As a final step, we can build a native binary by executing npm run package. The pkg tool will then bundle all source code and dependencies into a single binary file *bin/main*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a final step, we can build a native binary by executing `npm run package`. The pkg tool will then bundle all source code and dependencies into a single binary file `bin/main`. 
```

Author: See above.

Reviewer: `npm run package` however is at least a command typed in the terminal, thus _some sort of code_. ;)

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's true. 👍

```bash
$ npm run package

> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 package /private/tmp/my-cli
> pkg dist/main.js --no-bytecode --public-packages '*' --public --target host --output bin/main

> pkg@5.3.1
```

Before running the program, we have to make it executable 

```bash

> chmod +x ./bin/main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ chmod +x ./bin/main
```

Author: This is meant to be cop & pastable and I don't show the output. So, omitting the $ on each line is intentional.

> chmod +x ./bin/main

Reviewer: Sounds like something that could be done in the `postpackage` script.

Author: Wouldn't that imply that we create a distribution archive (which we don't)?

> postpack

    Runs AFTER the tarball has been generated but before it is moved to its final destination (if at all, publish does not save the tarball locally)

(https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v8/using-npm/scripts).

Reviewer: Not `postpack` but `postpackage`.
Any `post<x>` script runs right after `<x>`, while `pre<x>` will be executed before `<x>`.

So if you run your `package` script
* the `prepackage` script (if it exists) will be executed before that while
* the `postpackage` script (again: if it exists) will be executed afterwards.

This can be done for any custom script.

https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v8/using-npm/scripts#pre--post-scripts

Reviewer 2: Ah ok, wasn't aware of that.

Author: I added a `postpackage` script in the repo.

```
Now we can simply run the binary from the shell without a Node.js installation without any dependency installations whatsoever.

```bash
$ ./bin/main yell 'hey!'
HEY!
```

## Summary

> TypeScript is a good choice for writing a CLI utility program due to various factors including being a developer-friendly language that also has static checks to assure code quality and because it offers a wide range of tooling choices for command-line programs within its ecosystem.

Reviewer: Can you split this sentence? I also like writing those, but it's hard to read.

> Moreover, as shown above, developing a CLI utility written in TypeScript does not preclude the option of exporting a stand-alone, native binary if we use a tool like pkg to bundle our program and dependencies into an application binary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, as shown above, developing a CLI utility written in TypeScript does not preclude the option of exporting a stand-alone, native binary if we use a tool like `pkg` to bundle our program and dependencies into an application binary.
```

Author: See above.

Reviewer: I would at least emphasise – or better link it, as this is some third party dependency one might want to read up on.

Reviewer 2: It was linked earlier. Don't really see the need to do it again, honestly. ;) I can emphasise it, though.

## About the Author: Friedrich Kurz

> I have been working for MaibornWolff as a full-time software engineer for 2.5 years now. In my current project, I'm working on AWS cloud infrastructure development for a client's web platform. I would describe myself as a technology generalist with a broad range of interests rather than a technology specialist but I'm also very interested in functional programming and general methods of writing correct, clean, and maintainable code.

Reviewer: It may feel odd, but other _About the Author_'s have been written in 3rd person. Thus...

> Friedrich has been working for MaibornWolff...

> Do you have any questions, suggestions, or comments? Get in touch with me [via mail](https://aemail.com/Z4YQ)!

Reviewer: I'd propose to add this above the 3rd person _About the Author_ part. Or rewrite it to be more 3rd person-ish.

# Writing CLI tools with TypeScript

## Introduction

There are quite a couple of technology options when it comes to writing a *command line interface* (CLI) tool.

> In fact, most of the modern languages at the very least provide some kind of out of the box support for command line argument parsing. 

Reviewer 3: (Wording)
```suggestion
In fact, most modern languages provide some kind of out of the box support for command line argument parsing. 
```

A few of the languages and libraries that I've used to write CLIs are listed below

* [clap](https://docs.rs/clap/latest/clap/) (Rust)
* [Click](https://docs.python-guide.org/scenarios/cli/) (Python)
* [Picocli](https://picocli.info/picocli-2.0-groovy-scripts-on-steroids.html) (Groovy)
* [Commander.js](https://github.com/tj/commander.js) (Node.js)

So, why would we prefer writing a CLI in TypeScript given all these other choices?

Well, TypeScript is an overall good choice for a couple of reasons: 

1. **compatibility** with JavaScript (TypeScript is a superset of—and by that token compatible with—JavaScript),
2. **popularity** (TypeScript was ranked 7th in the [2021 Stack Overflow Developer Survey](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2021#section-most-popular-technologies-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages) with JavaScript being 1st),
3. **tooling choice** (the Node.js ecosystem provides [quite a lot of CLI libraries](https://openbase.com/categories/js/best-javascript-cli-libraries)),
4. **developer friendliness** (TypeScript is a scripted language but also has an advanced type system and static type checking which helps writing high quality code),

> 5. **performance** (since TypeScript code is in the end typically run by Node.js it is in general sufficiently performant thanks to the [v8](https://v8.dev/) engine).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. **performance** (since TypeScript code is, in the end, typically run by Node.js, it is in general sufficiently performant thanks to the [v8](https://v8.dev/) engine).
```

> Nonetheless, a typically non-trivial part in any TypeScript project is set up. Using e.g. Python with the [Click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/8.1.x/) library, requires little more than writing a file with a [main function](https://docs.python.org/3/library/__main__.html#packaging-considerations). This set up complexity is of course due to the nature of TypeScript as a superset of JavaScript. To run TypeScript code, you typically transpile to JavaScript and then execute the JavaScript code with Node.js. (Yes, even [`ts-node`](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node) does that.) So, before running a program written in TypeScript, we we need to transpile to JavaScript first. This requires tooling and therefore setup.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nonetheless, a typically non-trivial part in any TypeScript project is the setup. Using e.g. Python with the [Click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/8.1.x/) library, requires little more than writing a file with a [main function](https://docs.python.org/3/library/__main__.html#packaging-considerations). This complexity is, of course, due to the nature of TypeScript being a superset of JavaScript. To run TypeScript code, you typically transpile it to JavaScript and then execute the JavaScript code with Node.js. (Yes, even [`ts-node`](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node) does that.) So, before running a program written in TypeScript, we need to transpile it to JavaScript first. This requires tooling and therefore setup.
```

> Preferably, we also want to have a single, packaged binary as the result of building our project rather than a script file to reduce installation overhead on part of the user. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Preferably, we also want to have a single, packaged binary as the result of building our project, rather than a script file, to reduce installation overhead on part of the user. 
```

To assure high code quality we also typically want to include code formatting, linting, and tests.

## Basic development flow

> To hit the ground running, we use a starter project which already contains all the set up required for running our code, formatting, linting, testing and packaging to a binary and install its dependencies. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To hit the ground running, I created a starter project which already contains all required boilerplate and dependencies for running, formatting, linting, testing the code and packaging it to a binary. 
```

> :information_source: The starter project for can be found on my [GitHub](https://github.com/fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter) and on [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter/). 

```bash
git clone git@github.com:fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter.git my-cli
cd my-cli 
npm i
```

Our starter project typescript-cliutil-starter uses 

> * the [*commander*](https://www.npmjs.com/package/commander) package for argument parsing and executing commands, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* the [*commander*](https://www.npmjs.com/package/commander) package for argument parsing, 
```

Author: I'm pretty sure it also executes the CLI commands. ;)

Reviewer 3: I think (while being true), it is not so important here and implicit with argument parsing :)
But I also see the argument for leaving it there, so just decide what you prefer.

> * code linting and formatting with [typescript-eslint](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint) and [prettier](https://prettier.io/), 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* code linting and formatting with [eslint](https://eslint.org/) and [prettier](https://prettier.io/), 
```

Typescript Eslint is just a ruleset. Eslint is the tool.

Author: True, thanks for the correction.

> * [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) as test runner as well as testing and assertion library, and 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) as test runner and assertion library, and 
```

> * [pkg](https://github.com/vercel/pkg) to build a stand alone binary.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [pkg](https://github.com/vercel/pkg) to build a standalone binary.
```

Author: Grammarly sagt hier _stand-alone_. Ich hab daher überall _stand alone_ mit _stand-alone_ ersetzt.

export default (): Command =>
  new Command()
    .name("yell")
    .description("Say the word passed as the first argument but louder")
    .argument("<word>")
    .action((word: string) => console.log(word.toLocaleUpperCase()));
```

We also have to register our yell command with the main CLI command in src/cmd.ts, i.e. add an import statement for our subcommand and register it using *Commander.addCommand* 

```typescript
// src/cmd.ts
// … 
import buildYellCmd from "./yell";
// …
export default (): Command => {
  const command = new Command()
    .option("-g, --greet", `Say ${HELLO}`, false)
    .addCommand(buildSayCmd())
    .addCommand(buildYellCmd())
    .addHelpCommand()
    .showHelpAfterError();
```

Having done that, we can run a quick test on our command using the `dev` script in package.json. The dev script simply executes our TypeScript code with    [`ts-node`](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node).

```
$ npm run dev -- yell 'hey!'

> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 dev /private/tmp/my-cli
> ts-node src/main.ts "yell" "hey!"

HEY!
```

We can also add a quick test by adding _src/yell.test.ts_ wit the following content

```typescript

> import buildCmd from "./cmd";
> 
> beforeEach(() => {
>   jest.spyOn(process, "exit").mockImplementation();
>   jest.spyOn(console, "log").mockImplementation();
> });
> 
> const buildArgs = (...args: string[]) => ["node", "cmd", ...args];
> 
> describe("Yell subcommand", () => {
>   it("Should say 'HEY!' when passed 'hey!'", () => {
>     const cmd = buildCmd();
>     cmd.parse(buildArgs("yell", "hey!"));
> 
>     expect(console.log).toHaveBeenCalledWith("HEY!");
>   });
> });

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
import buildCmd from "./cmd";

beforeEach(() => {
  jest.spyOn(process, "exit").mockImplementation();
  jest.spyOn(console, "log").mockImplementation();
});

describe("Yell subcommand", () => {
  it("Should say 'HEY!' when passed 'hey!'", () => {
    const cmd = buildCmd();

    cmd.parse(["node", "cmd", "yell", "hey!"]);

    expect(console.log).toHaveBeenCalledWith("HEY!");
  });
});
```

I would personally inline the helper to keep the example simpler. But decide for yourself if you agree with that.

```

> Since our Jest configuration expects JavaScript test files, we first have to transpile our code with the build script using the TypeScript compiler *tsc*. The transpiled JavaScript source code is put into the dist/ folder.

Reviewer 3: Normally you would use something like [ts-jest](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ts-jest) to avoid this part.

As an alternative, you could also use [vitest](https://vitest.dev/), which is very similar to `jest`, but supports typescript out of the box, without any configuration.

Author: Ok sure, makes sens. I wanted to keep things simple here though. ts-jest (or vitest) probably would require additional configuration and likely doesn't do anything else than transpiling and running test on the transpiled code anyway.

```bash
npm run build

> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 build /private/tmp/my-cli
> tsc --build
```

We can now run our test suite with Jest using the `test` script. New test files will automatically get recognized by Jest if they have—as in our case—the suffix _.test.js_

```
$ npm run test

> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 test /private/tmp/my-cli
> jest

...

Test Suites: 3 passed, 3 total
Tests:       8 passed, 8 total
Snapshots:   0 total
Time:        0.41 s, estimated 1 s
Ran all test suites.
```

As a final step, we can build a native binary by executing `npm run package`. The `pkg` tool will then bundle all source code an dependencies into a single binary file *bin/main*. 

```bash
$ npm run package

> @fkurz/typescript-cliutil-starter@1.0.0 package /private/tmp/my-cli
> pkg dist/main.js --no-bytecode --public-packages '*' --public --target host --output bin/main

> pkg@5.3.1
```

> Before running the program, we have to make it executable 

Reviewer 3: You forget that some users use windows ;)

Author: Point taken, but Windows user should hopefully have access to WSL. ;)

```bash
chmod +x ./bin/main
```

Now we can simply run the binary from the shell without a Node.js installation and without any dependency installations whatsoever.

```bash
$ ./bin/main yell 'hey!'
HEY!
```

## Summary

TypeScript is a good choice for writing a CLI utility program due to various factors including being a developer friendly language that also has static checks to assure code quality and moreover because it offers a wide range of tooling choices for command line programs within its ecosystem.

> As shown above, developing a CLI uility developed in TypeScript does not preclude the option of exporting a stand alone, native binary if we use a tool like pkg to bundle our program and dependencies into an application binary.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As shown above, developing a CLI utility developed in TypeScript does not preclude the option of exporting a standalone, native binary if we use a tool like pkg to bundle our program and dependencies.
```
